@c  This file includes everything after the titlepage.


@defcodeindex op
@defcodeindex hf
@defcodeindex lv



@ifnothtml
@shortcontents
@contents
@end ifnothtml


@menu
* Introduction::                              Introduction to @command{slibc} and this manual.
* Language facilities::                       C language facilities provided by the library.
* Error reporting::                           Detecting, reporting, and printing errors.
* Integer types::                             Portable and descriptive integer types.
* Memory allocation::                         How to give your process or memory.

* Free Software Needs Free Documentation::    Why free documentation is important.
* GNU General Public License::                Copying and sharing @command{slibc}.
* GNU Free Documentation License::            Copying and sharing this manual.

* Concept index::                             Index of concepts.
* Option index::                              Index of command line options.
* Program index::                             Index of utilities.
* Variable index::                            Index of environment variables.
* Header file index::                         Index of header files.
* Data type index::                           Index of data types.
* LValue index::                              Index of all types of lvalues.
* Function index::                            Index of functions and callable macros.
@end menu
@c In GNU Emacs a @detailmenu can be created with `C-c C-u m`.
@c TODO @detailmenu



@include chap/introduction.texinfo
@include chap/language-facilities.texinfo
@include chap/error-reporting.texinfo
@include chap/integer-types.texinfo
@include chap/memory-allocation.texinfo



@include appx/free-software-needs-free-documentation.texinfo

@node GNU General Public License
@appendix GNU General Public License
@include appx/gpl.texinfo

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include appx/fdl.texinfo



@node Concept index
@unnumbered Concept index
Index of concepts.
@printindex cp

@node Option index
@unnumbered Option index
Index of command line options.
@printindex op

@node Program index
@unnumbered Program index
Index of utilities.
@printindex pg

@node Variable index
@unnumbered Variable index
Index of environment variables.
@printindex vr

@node Header file index
@unnumbered Header file index
Index of header files.
@printindex hf

@node Data type index
@unnumbered Data type index
Index of type definitions, structures, unions, enumerations,
and built in data types.
@printindex tp

@node LValue index
@unnumbered LValue index
Index of variables, constant preprocessor values, and lvalue macros.
@printindex lv

@node Function index
@unnumbered Function index
Index of functions and callable macros.
@printindex fn

