\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include reusable/macros.texinfo
@copying
@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright @copyright{} 2015  @w{Mattias Andrée @e{maandree@@member.fsf.org}}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version@tie{}1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Free Software Needs Free Documentation'', the
``GNU General Public License'', the ``GNU Free Documentation License'',
with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@c THIS WAS LAST CHANGED 2015-OCTOBER-12
@c When updated, please remember to update hardcopy-copying.texinfo too.
@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end copying


@setfilename slibc.info
@settitle slibc -- Stockholm C Standard Library
@documentlanguage en_GB
@include titlepage-data.texinfo

@c  You can change the title of the document in dir by compiling with
@c    INFO_FLAGS='-c CATEGORY=your_new_category'
@ifclear CATEGORY
@set CATEGORY Multimedia
@end ifclear

@dircategory @value{CATEGORY}
@direntry
* slibc: (slibc).               @value{subtitle}
@end direntry

@documentdescription
Developer and maintainer manual for the
Stockholm C Standard Library.
@end documentdescription
@c %**end of header


@iftex
@c @set USLETTER
@c @set AFOURPAPER
@c @set AFIVEPAPER
@c @set SMALLBOOK

@c @set HARDCOPY
@c @set CROPMARKS
@c @set SKIPCHAPTERNEWPAGE
@c @set SKIPFONTTEXTSIZE
@end iftex
@c @set LOGO
@c @set DOUBLE_HEADINGS
@c @set SINGLE_HEADINGS
@c @set AMERICANSPACING
@c @set FINALOUT

@ignore

  CROPMARKS has no effect unless HARDCOPY is set. CROPMARKS
  and AFIVEPAPER (or actually @cropmarks and @afivepaper) does
  not play well together.

  You can configure how TeX output files should look by
  uncommenting @set commands above. Do not uncomment more
  than one of the paper sizes (USLETTER, AFOURPAPER, AFIVEPAPER
  and SMALLBOOK); if none is uncomment AFOURPAPER will be set
  unless HARDCOPY is set, in which case SMALLBOOK will be set.
  However, if you do not want to modify this source file, you can
  run `make` with for example `TEXIFLAGS='--texinfo="@set HARDCOPY"'`.

  Finally, you can include, on the front page, the version of slibc
  that the manual is up to date with, by setting the value of VERSION
  to the version of slibc, as well as date of the last update by
  setting DATE, and edition by setting EDITION. This is intended for
  printed manuals. The date is recommended to not be more accurate,
  or less accurate, than to the month. The edition should be formatted
  as, for example, "1@sup{st}".

@end ignore

@comment You can see these too with TEXINFO_FLAGS.
@c @paragraphindent asis
@c @firstparagraphindent none
@c @exampleindent asis
@c @kbdinputstyle distinct

@include reusable/paper.texinfo



@ifset AFIVEPAPER
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@set SMALLBOOK_OR_AFIVEPAPER
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_AFIVEPAPER
@end ifset
@ifset USLETTER
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@end ifset
@ifset AFOURPAPER
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_AFIVEPAPER
@end ifset
@ifset SMALLBOOK
@set SMALLBOOK_OR_AFIVEPAPER
@end ifset

@ifset SMALLFONT
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLFONT
@ifset SMALLBOOK
@set SMALLBOOK_WITH_SMALLFONT
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLBOOK_WITH_SMALLFONT
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLBOOK_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset
@ifset AFIVEPAPER
@set AFIVEPAPER_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset
@ifset AFOURPAPER
@set AFOURPAPER_WITH_SMALLFONT
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_AFOURPAPER_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset
@ifset USLETTER
@set USLETTER_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset
@end ifset
@ifset AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLFONT
@set AFOURPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLBOOK_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset
@ifset AFIVEPAPER_OR_USLETTER
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_USLETTER_OR_SMALLBOOK_WITH_SMALLFONT
@set AFIVEPAPER_OR_AFOURPAPER_WITH_SMALLFONT
@end ifset



@include hardcopy-copying.texinfo
@include reusable/titlepage.texinfo
@setheadings{}

@include content.texinfo


@bye

